Multilevel Bayesian Framework for Modeling the Production,
Propagation and Detection of Ultra High Energy Cosmic Rays

Kunlaya Soiaporn, David Chernoff, Thomas Loredo, David Ruppert, Ira Wasserman


The sources of ultra-high energy cosmic rays (UHECRs) are unknown but are
likely nearby galaxies.  To assess  association of UHECRs and candidate
sources, we developed a  multilevel Bayesian framework.  We demonstrate this
framework using simple models similar to those in previous studies, but our
results suggest a need for more complex models; these also can be fit within
our framework.  We use MCMC methods to implement the approach to model data on
69 UHECRs observed by the Pierre Auger Observatory (PAO) during 2004-2009,
using a volume-complete catalog of 17 nearby active galactic nuclei (AGN) as
candidate sources.  The reported PAO data are incomplete; an early portion
(Period 1) was used to set an energy cut maximizing anisotropy, and only
cosmic rays above that cut are reported. This data-tuning proves problematic
for independent analyses.  Assuming a common, isotropic UHECR emission rate
("standard candles") and using the untuned data after Period 1, there is no
significant evidence for association of UHECRs with nearby AGNs versus an
isotropic population of sources.  If the association model is adopted, the
fraction of UHECRs  associated with these AGN is likely nonzero but well below
50%. Relatively small magnetic deflections are favored; models that assign a
large fraction of UHECRs to a single nearby source are ruled out unless very
large deflections are specified a priori.  Including Period 1 data alters the
conclusions significantly, and a simulation study suggests that the Period 1
data are anomalous, presumably due to the tuning.  Accurate and optimal
analysis of future data will likely require more complete disclosure of the
data.


56 pp, 13 figures.
An abridged version is submitted for publication to Annals of Applied
Statistics.


MSC classes (#s only, from http://www.ams.org/mathscinet/msc/msc2010.html):
85A35 Statistical astronomy;
62F15 Bayesian inference;
62H11 Directional data; spatial statistics;
62P35 Applications to physics

Categories	
   Primary:	  High Energy Astrophysical Phenomena (astro-ph.HE)   
   Cross lists:	
Instrumentation and Methods for Astrophysics (astro-ph.IM)
Applications (stat.AP)    


Problem with CRCoincLevels.eps:
Contains Helvetica fonts (OmniGraffle can't turn this off), and the
font lines start with "%" which screws up arXiv's AutoTeX.  Reprocess
with eps2eps -> CRCoincLevels2.eps.

==================
Your submission submit/0498347 has been assigned the permanent arXiv
identifier 1206.4569 and is available at:

http://arxiv.org/abs/1206.4569

 
The paper password for this article is: 5beux
Please share this with your co-authors. They may use it to claim
ownership.


Abstract will appear in today's mailing as:
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
\\
arXiv:1206.4569
From: Thomas Loredo <loredo@astro.cornell.edu>
Date: Wed, 20 Jun 2012 18:13:01 GMT   (899kb)

Title: Multilevel Bayesian Framework for Modeling the Production, Propagation
  and Detection of Ultra-High Energy Cosmic Rays
Authors: Kunlaya Soiaporn, David Chernoff, Thomas Loredo, David Ruppert, Ira
  Wasserman
Categories: astro-ph.HE astro-ph.IM stat.AP
Comments: 56 pp, 13 figures. An abridged version is submitted for publication
  to Annals of Applied Statistics
MSC-class: 85A35 62F15 62H11 62P35
License: http://arxiv.org/licenses/nonexclusive-distrib/1.0/
\\
  The sources of ultra-high energy cosmic rays (UHECRs) are unknown but are
likely nearby galaxies. To assess association of UHECRs and candidate sources,
we developed a multilevel Bayesian framework. We demonstrate this framework
using simple models similar to those in previous studies, but our results
suggest a need for more complex models; these also can be fit within our
framework. We use MCMC methods to implement the approach to model data on 69
UHECRs observed by the Pierre Auger Observatory (PAO) during 2004-2009, using a
volume-complete catalog of 17 nearby active galactic nuclei (AGN) as candidate
sources. The reported PAO data are incomplete; an early portion (Period 1) was
used to set an energy cut maximizing anisotropy, and only cosmic rays above
that cut are reported. This data-tuning proves problematic for independent
analyses. Assuming a common, isotropic UHECR emission rate ("standard candles")
and using the untuned data after Period 1, there is no significant evidence for
association of UHECRs with nearby AGNs versus an isotropic population of
sources. If the association model is adopted, the fraction of UHECRs associated
with these AGN is likely nonzero but well below 50%. Relatively small magnetic
deflections are favored; models that assign a large fraction of UHECRs to a
single nearby source are ruled out unless very large deflections are specified
a priori. Including Period 1 data alters the conclusions significantly, and a
simulation study suggests that the Period 1 data are anomalous, presumably due
to the tuning. Accurate and optimal analysis of future data will likely require
more complete disclosure of the data.
\\